“Always Allow Jehovah to Direct Your Steps”
is the theme Brother Geoffrey Jackson,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now share with us.
Well, it’s a real privilege
and pleasure for me
to stand before you again.
It just seems like a few days ago
when I had the privilege
of giving you the first lecture
that I give at Gilead.
And now, here it is,
your very special day of graduation.
Before you go on
to your assignments after graduation,
we’d like to leave you with a question,
Are you willing
to allow Jehovah to direct your steps?
Now, we all know how you’re going to answer
because we know that you’ve been willing
to allow Jehovah to direct your steps
right up to this moment.
That’s why you dedicated
yourselves to Jehovah,
why you entered full-time service,
special full-time service,
and that’s why you’re here
—having attended Gilead.
And that’s why we love you,
and we’re proud of you
because you are willing
to allow Jehovah to direct your steps.
But, you know, perhaps it seems
a little presumptuous on our part
to ask the question
about are we willing to allow Jehovah.
Can mere man allow Jehovah to do anything?
Well, the reason behind that question is,
of course, that Jehovah
doesn’t force himself on us.
It doesn’t automatically happen
that Jehovah directs our steps.
In fact, something is required of us,
and this, in a sense,
allows Jehovah to work with us.
Let’s have a look in our Bibles
at an interesting scripture
in the book of Psalms.
It’s Psalm 37,
a section of Scripture
that we all use
over and over again in the service.
But this time,
we’re going to look at verse 23,
Psalm 37:23:
“Jehovah guides the steps of a man
when He finds pleasure in his way.”
Now, if you were just listening to that
and you didn’t have a printed
or electronic copy in front of you,
it would be easy
to misunderstand this verse.
Why?
Well, if you hear it read
“when He finds pleasure in his way,”
you naturally assume “when [the man]
finds pleasure in [Jehovah’s] way.”
But you notice the New World Translation
capitalizes the “He”
—“when He finds pleasure in his way.”
So now if we were
to substitute the pronouns there,
what does it really say?
“Jehovah guides the steps of a man
when [Jehovah] finds pleasure
in [the man’s] way.”
Now, isn’t that an interesting concept?
So for us to have our steps
guided by Jehovah,
we have to do things
that bring pleasure to Jehovah.
And when Jehovah finds pleasure in our way,
then he directs our steps.
Isn’t that a profound thought?
So in that way, once we do things
in accordance with Jehovah’s will,
it’s as if we figuratively allow Jehovah
to direct our steps.
Now, that doesn’t come automatically
just because we pray to Jehovah,
“Please, direct my steps.”
Let’s think of two examples
from the Scriptures,
two negative examples,
that help us in this regard.
First of all, let’s think about Balaam.
Now, remember this is
in the 15th century B.C.E.,
when the Israelites were
about to go into the Promised Land.
The Moabites were very worried about it.
Balaam was a man who had
some connection to the worship of Jehovah.
And now all of a sudden,
these messengers come to Balaam,
and they ask him to curse God’s people.
And do you remember what happened?
What did Balaam do?
He didn’t automatically answer, did he?
He said: ‘Wait here overnight.
I want to hear from Jehovah.’
And what did Jehovah say to him?
Basically, ‘Don’t go!’
Now, that’s not hard to understand, is it?
‘Don’t go’ is simple;
you don’t need a lawyer
to try and work out what that means.
But then what happened?
Well, the pressure intensified, didn’t it?
And more messengers came
—this time, princes
and more offers of material gain.
Now, what did Balaam do?
Well, he had clearly heard
Jehovah’s direction: ‘Don’t go.’
But what did he do?
Well, his heart was already leaning
in a certain direction.
So he was hoping this would change a little.
So he said: ‘Well, let’s just wait
and see what Jehovah says.’
Now, this time what did Jehovah say?
‘Go,
but don’t say anything
I don’t tell you to say.’
In other words:
‘Only say what I tell you.’
Now, was this because Jehovah
was directing Balaam’s steps?
Or was it because he allowed
Balaam to go his own way?
Well, we see what happened
—three times, resistance.
But then what happened?
Well, notice,
if we turn across to Numbers 22,
we hear a very clear statement.
In fact, nearly as clear
as the statement, ‘Don’t go.’
Numbers 22:32:
“Then Jehovah’s angel said to him:
“‘Why have you beaten
your donkey these three times?
“‘Look!
I myself came out to offer resistance,
because your way is in defiance of my will.’”
So there we see the answer, don’t we?
It wasn’t Jehovah directing his steps.
Jehovah was resisting what he was doing.
So, what do we learn from this?
Well, even though Balaam initially
wanted to get Jehovah’s direction,
Jehovah didn’t force himself on Balaam.
And when Balaam was determined
to go down a certain course,
yes, Jehovah gave him
signals of ‘don’t go’ and again ‘don’t go.’
But Jehovah allowed him to go and, of course,
eventually he ended up dying because of that.
And, of course, many others
died because of that as well.
So, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, sometimes we may feel
that at a certain point in our life,
we say: “Jehovah,
what do you want me to do?
What’s your will?”
And that’s good
that we pray to Jehovah that way.
But what do we need to do?
We need to do what Jehovah wants us to do.
Then, when he finds pleasure
in what we’re doing,
he directs our step.
So that’s a good lesson, isn’t it?
The second example we want
to use is of the unnamed prophet.
Do you remember the one
that’s mentioned in 1 Kings chapter 13,
who was instructed to go up to Israel
and to utter a pronouncement
there to King Jeroboam?
Now, remember the instructions again
that Jehovah gave him:
‘Go up one way;
come back the other way.
Don’t eat or drink.’
Now, even when the king said:
‘Come and eat and drink,’
what did he say?
‘Oh, no.
I know what Jehovah wants me to do.’
But then what happened?
Although he was doing
very well up to that point,
remember the old prophet
tricked him by saying:
‘Oh, don’t worry.
An angel spoke to me and said:
“It’s OK.”’
What did the unnamed prophet say?
‘Let me check with Jehovah again.
I mean, he did actually tell me.’
No.
‘OK, let’s eat!’
Well, again it resulted in disaster,
didn’t it?
What’s the lesson we learned there?
Well, although he started a course
that was allowing Jehovah
to direct his steps,
he didn’t continue to follow
the direction that Jehovah had given him.
Now, that’s a good lesson for us too,
isn’t it?
We may do the same.
There could be friends
—could even be people we respect—
who give us advice contrary
to what Jehovah is telling us,
and that could also lead to disaster.
What would have helped
in both of those situations?
Well, I’d like to read you
a quote from The Watchtower
from back in 1950
before any of you were ever born
and, incidentally, before I was born too.
But I’m sure Brother Herd read it.
Anyway, the quote says:
“It is far better
“to take a few moments for quiet reflection,
“fully considering God’s requirements
“before rushing into an action
that might bring God’s reproof.”
Let me read it again:
“It is far better to take
a few moments for quiet reflection,
“fully considering God’s requirements
“before rushing into an action
that might bring God’s reproof.”
So how can we summarize that
in a nice little expression?
Well, we could say:
“Don’t rush in.
“Pause,
“ponder,
“pray,
“and prove.
Prove to yourself
what Jehovah really wants you to do.”
So with that in mind,
as you go do your assignments,
you’re going to find all sorts of challenges.
But how can you apply this principle
of don’t rush in,
pause, ponder, pray,
and prove to yourself what Jehovah wants?
Well, let’s consider
three different circumstances.
So we always want
to allow Jehovah to direct our steps
when we’re excited about something.
We’re excited
—we want to get in and do something.
Now let’s take, for example, Jacob.
We all remember,
it describes to us in the Scriptures
how he felt when he was told
that his son Joseph supposedly had died.
He was grief-stricken,
and for years
he was left with that impression
that his son was dead.
Now, can you imagine?
Just try to imagine
the joy that he would have felt
when all of a sudden
his sons return back from Egypt.
There are wagons
—I mean, not just the average wagons—
I’m sure they were pretty fancy wagons.
They’re coming to pick him up.
He finds out Joseph is alive.
Not only that, he’s in Egypt.
He’s got a very high position there.
How do you think—?
Do you think excited is the word?
Of course!
He’s extremely excited and overjoyed.
So he left Hebron,
went down to Beer-sheba.
But what did he do
before he left the Promised Land
to go into Egypt?
Well, let’s have a look
in Genesis chapter 46.
Genesis chapter 46
and we’ll read verses 1-4:
“So Israel [Jacob] took all
that he had and departed.
When he arrived at Beer-sheba,
he offered sacrifices to . . . God.”
You see, he stopped,
he paused, he pondered.
Yes, verse 2:
“Then God spoke to Israel
in a vision by night and said:
“‘Jacob, Jacob!’
to which he said: ‘Here I am!’
“He said: ‘I am the true God,
the God of your father.
“‘Do not be afraid
to go down to Egypt,
“‘for there I will make you
into a great nation.
“‘I myself will go down
with you to Egypt,
“‘and I myself will also
bring you back from there,
and Joseph will lay
his hand on your eyes.’”
Do we see what happened?
You see, he stopped,
he paused, he pondered,
he wanted to prove
to himself what Jehovah wanted.
And Jehovah gave him the go-ahead.
He had Jehovah’s blessing,
and we know how that turned out.
So do we see the lesson for us?
Perhaps, at times,
we get all excited about something.
It appears good;
it appears that we should do it.
What should we do?
Pause, ponder, pray,
and prove to yourself that
that’s really what Jehovah wants you to do.
Now, let’s think of a second example.
Imagine the time when the Israelites
were entering the Promised Land.
They were about to conquer the land.
How exciting it must have been to them!
They were busy with an assignment
that Jehovah had given them.
But still, even if we are
in the middle of an assignment,
we have to pause, ponder, pray,
and prove to ourselves
what Jehovah wants us to do.
For example, in Joshua chapter 8,
when we look there,
you’ll notice (we won’t read it)
but they were able to capture Jericho.
Then in Ai, there was a problem,
wasn’t there?
They had to sort that out.
They went back.
They were able to defeat
the inhabitants of Ai.
What did they do next?
You see, here they are poised
to conquer the whole Promised Land.
They went up to Mount Ebal,
not Mt. Ebo,
just so we got that right.
They went up to Mount Ebal,
and what did they do?
They paused, pondered, prayed,
and proved to themselves
what Jehovah wanted them to do.
They read the whole Law.
Yes, they stopped the military campaign,
took time to make sure
what Jehovah wanted them to do,
and then they went ahead
to complete that military campaign.
So again, what lesson for us?
You’ve received many assignments.
You will receive
more assignments in the future.
But just because you’re in the middle
of an assignment you’ve started
doesn’t mean to say that you’ll continue
to allow Jehovah to direct your steps.
You have to pause, ponder, pray,
and prove to yourself
what Jehovah wants.
Now, the third situation,
as a reminder,
is that we still need
to be extra careful to allow Jehovah
to direct our steps
when we have special privileges.
You see, it’s very easy
for us perhaps to think:
‘Well, now I’ve been to Gilead.
‘I can probably miss a few meetings
for a few months anyway.
‘I’ve got a bit of spiritual fat.
‘You see, all those other brothers,
they need to go to the meetings.
But I got plenty
to keep me going for a while.’
Really?
Well, we have an example in the Scriptures
to help us in that regard.
Let’s look in Luke chapter 2,
and this, of course, is the account
dealing with Joseph and Mary
and Jesus’ birth.
So Luke 2:22-24,
there it says:
“Also, when the time came
for purifying them
“according to the Law of Moses,
“they brought him up to Jerusalem
to present him to Jehovah,
“just as it is written in Jehovah’s Law:
“‘Every firstborn male
must be called holy to Jehovah.’
“And they offered a sacrifice
according to what
“is said in the Law of Jehovah:
‘a pair of turtledoves
or two young pigeons.’”
So, what happened here?
When?
Well, remember
this was 40 days after Jesus’ birth.
Mary needed to go to the temple
to purify herself, according to the Law.
And we notice
verses 22 and 24 refer to that.
The Law says to do that.
But verse 23,
what’s that referring to?
If you look at the marginal reference
where this is taken from,
it’s not talking
about the purification of Mary.
What is it talking about?
Well, possibly it’s talking about
when the man, the husband,
would have to present the child to Jehovah
and pay the five shekels
and acknowledge that this child was his.
So if that’s the case,
that means both Joseph and Mary
took the time to go
and make these presentations.
Joseph was supposed
to do that after 30 days
after Jesus’ birth
or sometime thereafter.
But whatever the case,
what do we learn from this?
Joseph and Mary didn’t say:
‘Well, you know,
we had an angel come to visit us.
‘And this child
is very, very, very special.
‘And remember,
when he was born, the shepherds came.
‘The heavens were filled with angels.
‘Surely, we shouldn’t have to go
and pay the five shekels
and offer up the birds.’
They didn’t do that, did they?
They didn’t use the special privilege
they had as an excuse
not to do what Jehovah
had instructed them to do.
Do we see the lesson for us?
If that was the case with them,
what about us?
It doesn’t matter what privileges we have,
we still have to do the basic things.
We can’t use our privileges
as an excuse not to do those things
—things such as daily Bible reading, prayer,
meeting attendance,
the witnessing work, and so on.
So yes, we need to make sure
that we don’t allow those things to,
as it were, give us an excuse
to not do what Jehovah wants us to do.
Well, when we think about it,
how could we summarize
what we personally need to do to make sure
that we allow Jehovah to direct our step?
Well, the last scripture
I’d like to share with you
is in the book of Proverbs
—Proverbs 23:19.
Proverbs 23:19:
“Listen, my son, and become wise,
and direct your heart in the right way.”
So, what do we need to do?
We need to direct our heart
in the right way.
And when we go in the right way,
what happens?
Jehovah then favors us,
he’s happy with us,
and then, what does he do?
He directs our steps.
So it’s all very exciting.
You’re going to your assignments soon,
and we wish you Jehovah’s rich blessing.
And we know that you will succeed
with Jehovah’s help.
But also remember,
it doesn’t matter what situation you face
—you’re excited about something,
you’re right in the middle of an assignment,
or perhaps you have special privileges
—what do you need to do?
Pause, ponder, pray,
and prove to yourself what Jehovah wants.
If you do that,
we know you will always
allow Jehovah to guide your steps.
Now, we’ll have
our presentation of the diplomas.
First, we have Brother and Sister Akmatov
who will be returning to Kyrgyzstan.
And now we have Brother and Sister Arencibia
who will be returning to the United States.
Brother and Sister Bois
will be returning to Benin.
Next, we have Brother Boseovski
who will be returning to Canada.
And we have Sister Galashina
who will be returning to Eastern Europe.
And this is our singer.
Brother Habab will be returning
to the Philippines.
Brother and Sister Jacob
will be returning to Germany.
Brother and Sister Katalinic
will be returning to Croatia.
Next, we have Sister Khang
who will be returning to the United States.
And now we have
Brother and Sister Komaromi
who will be returning to Serbia.
Brother and Sister Kumagai
will be returning to Japan.
And now we have Brother and Sister Maganha
who will be returning to Brazil.
Brother and Sister Mapfumo
will be returning to Zimbabwe.
Brother and Sister Marynovych
will be returning to Ukraine.
And next we have Brother and Sister Mhlongo
who will be returning to South Africa.
And now we have Brother and Sister Ndung’u
who will be returning to Kenya.
Brother and Sister Nishikura
will be returning to Asia.
And we have Brother Ogele
who will be returning to Nigeria.
Brother and Sister Ouatchome
will be returning to Cameroon.
Brother and Sister Perera
will be returning to Sri Lanka.
And we have Sister Prangishvili
who will be returning to Georgia.
Sister Prayogo
will be returning to Indonesia.
Brother Reabow
will be returning to South Africa.
Brother Savolainen
will be returning to Finland.
And Brother and Sister Scherrer
will be returning to France.
Brother and Sister Sztankovits
will be returning to Hungary.
Brother Thollie
will be returning to Sierra Leone.
Brother and Sister Vasilev
will be returning to Eastern Europe.
And finally, Brother and Sister Weiss
will be returning to Congo (Kinshasa).
Now we’re going to invite
Brother Nelson Ogele,
who will be returning to Nigeria,
and he’s going to read
the class letter to us.
“September 9, 2017.
“To the Governing Body and the Bethel family.
“Dear Brothers:
“At Psalm 25:12, 13,
“David wrote:
“‘Who is the man fearing Jehovah?
“‘He will instruct him
“‘about the way he should choose.
“He will experience what is good.’
“The instructions we have received
“at Jehovah’s hand over the past five months
“have far surpassed our expectations.
“Indeed, our hearts have been filled
“with so many good things!
“When we started our training,
“Bible verses were
“like many isolated dots on a canvas.
“We have been taught
“how to connect them,
“revealing a marvelous picture.
“Moreover, we have learned
“how to work with Jehovah
“even more closely.
“We have also been taught how to display
“the mind of Christ more fully,
“especially by imitating his love
“when dealing with our brothers and sisters.
“Like Paul, we ask:
“‘What, then,
are we to say about these things?’
“We have mixed feelings:
“deep gratitude
“and a sense
of insignificance overwhelm us,
“gratitude to you
“members of the Governing Body
“for your loving and honest counsel,
“gratitude to you
“our dear instructors
“for your tireless efforts
“to reach and touch our hearts,
“and gratitude to you
“dear members of the Bethel family.
“We will never forget your warm welcome
“and the way you included us in your family.
“On the other hand,
we feel insignificant
“in view of the greatness
of Jehovah’s organization,
“insignificant as we begin to understand
“the depth of God’s Word,
“insignificant in view
“of the immense task ahead of us
“as we strive to apply
“all that we have learned.
“Furthermore,
“staying at Patterson for 20 weeks
“allowed us to feel the pulse
“of the earthly part
of Jehovah’s organization.
“We have enjoyed the willing spirit
“of the many young ones
“and the wonderful example
of faithful service
“of our older brothers and sisters.
“While working with you,
“we realized how much is accomplished
“behind the scenes.
“And we were deeply touched
“when we personally saw
how the Governing Body
“genuinely cares
“for our dear brothers and sisters
“all over the world,
“and especially now in Russia.
“However, these
“are more than just mere memories.
“It is a turning point in our lives.
“We understand
“that the biggest test is still ahead of us.
“Whatever assignment comes our way,
“we are determined to do
“our very best for Jehovah’s glory
“and the benefit of his organization.
“Yes, ‘it is
“‘the blessing of Jehovah
“that makes one rich.’
“We have been enriched
by making new lifelong friends
“and by the wonderful heritage
received at Gilead.
“It is now
“our wish and pleasure
“to share these blessings
“with others in our assignments.
“Your brothers and sisters,
the 143rd class of Gilead.”
It was definitely brought home to us today
that Jehovah is our Grand Instructor.
There is none like him
in the entire universe.
He is so patient with us
and so kind and so merciful
and definitely so loving.
He’s been good to us today,
and he’s going to be good for us forever.
So we’re just getting started.
We’re crawling.
But one of these days, we’ll get up
and we’ll walk and we’ll run.
Jehovah ranks the highest.
He was teaching not just you
but all of us today.
None of us as sinful humans
could say or speak the words
that touched our hearts without the help
of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
And there’s not a brother
that does not ask for that spirit, or sister,
who steps out here before God’s sheep
and gives any kind
of encouragement or instruction.
Jesus gave us the promise
at John 14:26,
and this is what he said.
Those of you who have your pads,
you’re already there.
I’m just getting there.
That’s John 14:26, which says:
“But the helper, the holy spirit,
“which the Father will send in my name,
“that one will teach you all things
“and bring back to your minds
all the things I told you.”
So
the holy spirit is going
to help you remember.
Without it, you couldn’t remember.
But we pray for the holy spirit,
and it’s sent to us, and we remember.
Sometimes we’re shocked at how much
we can remember at a given time.
Well, it’s not us.
Somebody is helping us to remember,
and we must never forget that.
That promise
that Jesus gave way back then
held true not only for Jesus’ disciples
back then who loved him very much
but it holds true today
for those who love him as we do.
And we definitely love him.
There is just no doubt in our minds
about the love that we have in our hearts
for Jehovah God and Jesus.
It’s there.
Jehovah opens our minds
and hearts to receive his Word.
Just think of the things that we’ve heard
from this platform today
—things that touched the heart,
warmed the soul.
Jehovah was with us today
by means of his holy spirit.
Of course, this happened years ago
to a worshipper of Jehovah.
It wasn’t a male; it was a female.
At Acts 16:14, we find it’s Lydia.
It reads: “And a certain woman named Lydia,
“a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira
“and a worshiper of God, was listening,
“and Jehovah opened her heart wide
“to pay attention to the things
being spoken by Paul.”
When Jehovah speaks
and he opens our hearts,
we must not close our hearts
by failing to pay attention
to the brother that Jehovah
is using to speak through.
If we’re not careful,
we just may close to that brother
because his tie is not straight,
his shoes are not shined.
That’s dangerous.
We want to listen to him.
Jehovah put him up there,
and we want to listen to what he has to say.
Don’t be so concerned with the way he looks.
If someone was concerned
about the way a donkey looked,
he wouldn’t have paid any attention years ago
because Jehovah spoke through a donkey.
Donkeys are not the most beautiful animal.
But Jehovah chooses
what Jehovah wants to choose,
and he teaches lessons
for each and every one of us.
Now, of course, when Lydia
was opening her heart
by Jehovah’s help,
she’s looking at Paul.
But Paul may not have been
the most handsome man to look at.
We don’t really know.
Some say that his eyebrows matched.
Others say he couldn’t see good.
Some say he was bald-headed.
We don’t really know.
One of these days we’ll know.
Well, you’re no longer Gilead students
you are ex-Gilead students,
but may you never
become ex-students of Jehovah
—your Grand Instructor.
They didn’t give me too many minutes,
you know, to talk to you,
but that’s all the time I’ve got.
Isn’t this a beautiful group, though?